# Technical documentation : [ontology] Ontology extension system using API

**Document history (please add a line when you edit the document)**

| Date       | Editor(s)              | OpenSILEX version   | Comment           |
|------------|------------------------|---------------------|-------------------|
| 22/05/2026 | yvan.roux@opensilex.fr | 1.5.0 Freaky Fossil | Document creation |

> ⚠️ _WARNING_ : This document is about API ontology extension system and do not cover module extension system. ⚠️
>
> If you are looking for explanation about the way you can extend the core ontology by creating a new module and putting owl files in it, this document is not for you.

## Table of contents

<!-- TOC -->
* [Technical documentation : [{category}] {title}](#technical-documentation--category-title)
    * [Table of contents](#table-of-contents)
    * [Definitions](#definitions)
    * [functional requirements](#functional-requirements)
    * [Non-functional requirements](#non-functional-requirements)
    * [Solution](#solution)
    * [Technical specifications](#technical-specifications)
        * [Technical definitions](#technical-definitions)
        * [Detailed explanations](#detailed-explanations)
        * [Tests](#tests)
        * [Environment](#environment)
    * [Limitations and improvements](#limitations-and-improvements)
    * [Documentation](#documentation)
<!-- TOC -->

## Definitions

- **Ontology** : An ontology is a formal representation of a set of concepts and the relationships between those concepts. It describes a data model that is used in OpenSILEX to represent concepts and manage data.
- **Class** : In ontology, a class is a type of concept, for example "Plant" or "Experiment". A class `ClassA` represent objets that has the relation `object rdf:type ClassA`.
- **Type** : The word type is often used as a synonym of class from a user perspective. In the interface we define new types of events rather than new subclasses of event.
- **Property** : In ontology, a property describe a relationship between concepts. For example, `rdfs:label` is a property that link a concept to a string that is its label (sort of name).
- **Custom class** : In OpenSILEX, a class is custom if it has been created by users through API services, and is not directly present in the ontologies.
- **Dynamic type** : Synonym of custom class, used from a user perspective (in the web interface).
- **property restriction** : Link between a property and a class.

## functional requirements

**functional specification** : to understand the purpose of the feature and its precise rules see relative functional specification file :
- [ontology-dynamique-type.md](../../../functional-specifications/ontology-dynamique-type.md)

## Non-functional requirements

- **Flexibility** : this feature is about flexibility. Users can in a way extend the data schema dynamically. 

## Solution

The solution is split in two parts :
- The `OntologyAPI` : mainly used to manage classes and properties, except for creating and deleting classes.
- The `VueOwlExtensionAPI` : mainly used to manage additional information about classes and properties that will be used by the front-end, and to create and delete classes.

### Classes

#### model

A class is split in two models :
- `ClassModel` : this model represent a classic OWL class with optional parents and children, a label and a comment.
- `VueClassExtensionModel` : this model represent additional information about a class that front-end need to display and manage the class. It contains information about icon and abstractness of the class.

#### VueClassExtensionModel

Every class with an associated `VueClassExtensionModel` is a custom class. The link between a `ClassModel` and a `VueClassExtensionModel` is only present in the `VueClassExtensionModel`.

The Uri of a `VueClassExtensionModel` is automatically generated by adding a suffix to the Uri of the associated `ClassModel`. See `VueOwlExtensionDAO.URI_SUFFIX`

#### Services

- `POST /vuejs/owl_extension/rdf_type` service of the `VueOwlExtensionAPI`. This service will create a new `ClassModel` and its associated `VueClassExtensionModel`. The class created with this service is a custom class. 
- `DELETE /vuejs/owl_extension/rdf_type/{uri}` service of the `VueOwlExtensionAPI`. This service will delete a `ClassModel` and its associated `VueClassExtensionModel`.

### Properties

#### model

Each property belong to one of this two model :
- `DatatypePropertyModel` : for properties that link a class to a literal value (string, number, date, etc.)
- `ObjectPropertyModel` : for properties that link a class to another class.

#### Services

- `POST /ontology/property` service of the `OntologyAPI`. This service will create a new property.
- `DELETE /ontology/property/{uri}` service of the `OntologyAPI`. This service will delete a property.

#### Binding properties to classes

Binding a property to a class is done by creating a new `OwlRestrictionModel`. This is done by the `POST /ontology/rdf_type_property_restriction` service of the `OntologyAPI`.

Example : I want to bind the property `hasColor` to the class `Plant` (which is a sublclass of `ScientificObject`). I will create a new restriction and fill the DTO with :
- `domain` : `ScientificObject`
- `property` : the Uri of the property `hasColor`
- `rdf_type` : the Uri of the class `Plant`