# Migrate to 1.5.0

## Deprecated API and compatibility
 
Notice that some API paths are deprecated and will be removed. Ensure your client applications do not use these paths anymore. The deprecated paths are:
- everything in `/security/users`
- POST `/core/data/by_targets`
- GET `/core/data/export`
- GET `/core/data`

Due to the new geospatial model, some services have their parameters changed. The `geometry` parameter of Scientific objects and
Facilities is now deprecated and will no longer be supported in future releases. For the moment, the behaviour of this parameter
has been changed :

### Scientific object

#### Creation

- POST `/core/scientific_objects`

The `geometry` parameter now creates a move at the object's creation time with the given location.

#### Update (breaking change)

- PUT `/core/scientific_objects`

:warning: Using the `geometry` parameter now returns an error. To update an object's geometry, you have to update or create
a new move.

#### Fetching

- GET `/core/scientific_objects`
- GET `/core/scientific_objects/{uri}`
- GET `/core/scientific_objects/by_uri`
- GET `/core/scientific_objects/geometry`

In the JSON response, the `geometry` field is a copy of the `location.geojson` field. In the `{uri}` service only,
a relation `isHosted` is also added to copy the `location.to` field if it exists.

#### CSV import

The `isHosted` and `hasGeometry` columns are now deprecated. Using these columns together with the new location model
columns is forbidden and will return an error.

Using either column will create a new move associated to the scientific object. The geometry of the move will take the
value of the `hasGeometry` column, and the `to` field will take the value of the `isHosted` column.

Trying to update a scientific object with either column is forbidden and will return an error. To udpate an object
location, you have to update or create new moves.

### Facility

#### Creation

- POST `/core/facilities`

The `geometry` parameter creates a move event with the given geometry.

#### Update

- PUT `/core/facilities`

Setting the `geometry` parameter returns an error. To update a facility geospatial information, you
should add a new move event of modify the existing ones.

#### Fetching

- GET `/core/facilities`
- GET `/core/facilities/{uri}`

The `geometry` field contains the same information as `lastPosition.geojson`

### Moves

In moves API, in order to avoid **breaking API changes**, we kept **deprecated API properties** despite significant logic changes.
This section explains the behavior of these deprecated properties. **Please do not use these properties, as they will be deleted in a future version, and use `location` property instead.**

Deprecated properties are : `from`, `to`, and `targetPositions`.

#### Creating a move

- A move with a non-null `location` property will ignore the deprecated properties listed above.
- A move filled with `from` and `to` properties will have the same behaviour as if it was filled with a location containing a `from` and `to` property
- A move filled with many `targetPositionswill` result in **many different moves**. If you send a move with 3 `targetPositions`, it will create 3 different moves with the same information. Only information contained in the `targetsPositions` will differ.
- `x`, `y`, `z`, `point` and `text` properties in `targetPositions.position` are used to fill resprectively `x`, `y`, `z`, `geojson` and `text` properties in the `location` property of the move.
- A move filled with `from` and `to` and with many `targetPositions` will result in many different moves, each move will have the same `location.from` and `location.to` properties.

#### Updating a move

Updating a move with one of the deprecated properties will result in an error. You can only update a move with the `location` property.

#### Getting a move

Getting a move will always return a move with the `location` property. The deprecated properties will not be returned in the response, even if they were used to create the move.

## Modifications to CSV import formats

The Scientific Objects CSV import format has changed slightly in this new version. vocabulary:isHosted and hasGeometry are now deprecated
accepted columns. Instead, you can use a set of columns that you would normally find in a MoveEvent import, these columns are:
- start_date_of_Location, the optional moment where the Scientific Object began to have this location.
- end_date_of_Location, the moment where the Scientific Object no longer has this Location. Just like a Move Event import, this one is required, if an End is filled but not a Start, then the Move is considered to be instantaneous.
- from, the optional Facility where the Scientific Object is being moved away from.
- to, the optional Facility where the Scientific Object is being moved too. This column replaces the old isHosted.
- coordinates, optional location in wkt format. This one replaces the old hasGeometry.
- x, y, z, textualPosition (4 columns) to provide extra information in textual format about the Move, just like a Move Event import

## Reset ontologies

Modifications have been made to the core ontologies in this version. You will need to update the ontologies on your triple store:

[! WARNING] > you should do this BEFORE running the migration command

```
java -jar opensilex.jar --CONFIG_FILE=<config_file> sparql reset-ontologies
```

## JVM manipulation for RDF4J servers

If you are using RDF4J as a triple store, you will need to increase the JVM stack size to avoid `StackOverflowError` when performing SPARQL queries.

You are using the provided docker compose in `opensilex-dev-tools/src/main/resources/docker/docker-compose.yml` ? We have updated the docker-compose file. you just have to refresh the RDF4J image by running:
```bash
cd <path_to_opensilex>/opensilex-dev-tools/src/main/resources/docker
docker compose up -d
```

It should say that MongoDb is running and RDF4J is created.

If you are using your own RDF4J server, you will need to manually increase the JVM stack size by running this command

```bash
java -Xss8m
```

no particular output confirmation is expected.

## Migrations

- To perform all the migrations required to upgrade to 1.5.0, you have to run this single command

```shell
# Connect to a console in OpenSILEX server
# From the directory which contains your OpenSILEX executable .jar file
java -jar opensilex.jar --CONFIG_FILE=<config_file> system run-update org.opensilex.migration.one_point_five_ALL.MigrateToOnePointFive
```

Doing this will apply the following Migrations.

### Migration of existing scientific objects which are created from Experiment with a relation: 'participatesIn'

- The command will add a relation between all Scientific Objects and Experiment when we create these from Experiment. If it is not done then there will be inconsistency in terms of SO data.

### Migration of Facilities location models:

- The command will make sure the Facilities are using all the new Location systems.

See the migration `org.opensilex.migration.one_point_five_ALL.UpdateFacilitiesWithLocationObservationCollectionModel`
from [migration_command.md](../how-to/migration_command.md) for additional notes

### Migration of Moves and ScientificObjects location models

- The command will make sure that ScientificObjects and Moves now use the new Location system.

### Migration of new links between Facilities, Variables and Devices

- The command will create shortcut connexions in between Facilities, Variables and Devices.

See the migration `org.opensilex.migration.one_point_five_ALL.FacilitiesLinkToVariablesAndDevicesMigration`
from [migration_command.md](../how-to/migration_command.md) for additional notes

## Migration troubleshooting

Depending on your datas you may encounter some issues when running the migration command.

### Cannot invoke "java.lang.Class.getCanonicalName()" because "clazz" is null

<details>
<summary>See complete stack trace of the error</summary>
<span>
14 Apr 2026;11:57:44.720 [main] ERROR org.opensilex.sparql.service.SPARQLService     - SPARQL TRANSACTION ROLLBACK: Cannot invoke "java.lang.Class.getCanonicalName()" because "clazz" is null
14 Apr 2026;11:57:44.721 [main] WARN  org.opensilex.migration.one_point_five_ALL.MigrateToOnePointFive     - Something went wrong in the FacilitiesLinkToVariablesAndDevicesMigration part of the migration!
14 Apr 2026;11:57:44.721 [main] ERROR org.opensilex.nosql.mongodb.MongoDBService     - MONGO TRANSACTION ROLLBACK
14 Apr 2026;11:57:44.721 [main] ERROR org.opensilex.migration.one_point_five_ALL.MigrateToOnePointFive     - Error while migrating too 1.5. No changes were saved on the databases
java.lang.NullPointerException: Cannot invoke "java.lang.Class.getCanonicalName()" because "clazz" is null
	at org.opensilex.sparql.deserializer.SPARQLDeserializerNotFoundException.<init>(SPARQLDeserializerNotFoundException.java:22)
	at org.opensilex.sparql.deserializer.SPARQLDeserializers.getForClass(SPARQLDeserializers.java:83)
	at org.opensilex.sparql.mapping.SPARQLClassQueryBuilder.addRelationsQuads(SPARQLClassQueryBuilder.java:1102)
	at org.opensilex.sparql.mapping.SPARQLClassQueryBuilder.addCreateBuilder(SPARQLClassQueryBuilder.java:360)
	at org.opensilex.sparql.mapping.SPARQLClassObjectMapper.addCreateBuilder(SPARQLClassObjectMapper.java:389)
	at org.opensilex.sparql.service.SPARQLService.createWithoutTransaction(SPARQLService.java:1226)
	at org.opensilex.sparql.service.SPARQLService.lambda$create$13(SPARQLService.java:1282)
	at org.opensilex.sparql.service.SPARQLService.withTransaction(SPARQLService.java:1175)
</span>
</details>

If you run into this error, it means you probably never migrate metadata publishers from dc:creator to dc:publisher. To fix this, you can run the following command to perform this migration:

```shell
# Connect to a console in OpenSILEX server
# From the directory which contains your OpenSILEX executable .jar file
java -jar opensilex.jar --CONFIG_FILE=<config_file> system run-update org.opensilex.migration.MetadataMigration
```

### SPARQL TRANSACTION ROLLBACK: [DeviceModel] Unknown URIS :

<details>
<summary>See complete stack trace example of the error</summary>
13 Apr 2026;14:24:03.034 [main] ERROR org.opensilex.sparql.service.SPARQLService - SPARQL TRANSACTION ROLLBACK: [DeviceModel] Unknown URIS : [http://opensilex.test/id/device/pwvsr0027, http://opensilex.test/id/device/hwsol0401, http://opensilex.test/id/device/hwsol0397, http://opensilex.test/id/device/pwvsr0034, http://opensilex.test/id/device/hwsol0404]
13 Apr 2026;14:24:03.036 [main] WARN  org.opensilex.migration.one_point_five_ALL.MigrateToOnePointFive - Something went wrong in the FacilitiesLinkToVariablesAndDevicesMigration part of the migration!
13 Apr 2026;14:24:03.037 [main] ERROR org.opensilex.nosql.mongodb.MongoDBService - MONGO TRANSACTION ROLLBACK
13 Apr 2026;14:24:03.037 [main] ERROR org.opensilex.migration.one_point_five_ALL.MigrateToOnePointFive - Error while migrating too 1.5. No changes were saved on the databases
org.opensilex.sparql.exceptions.SPARQLInvalidUriListException: [DeviceModel] Unknown URIS : [http://opensilex.test/id/device/pwvsr0027, http://opensilex.test/id/device/hwsol0401, http://opensilex.test/id/device/hwsol0397, http://opensilex.test/id/device/pwvsr0034, http://opensilex.test/id/device/hwsol0404]
	at org.opensilex.sparql.service.SPARQLService.validateRelations(SPARQLService.java:2311)
	at org.opensilex.sparql.service.SPARQLService.validateRelations(SPARQLService.java:2332)
	at org.opensilex.sparql.service.SPARQLService.validateAllRelations(SPARQLService.java:2288)
	at org.opensilex.sparql.service.SPARQLService.update(SPARQLService.java:1489)
	at org.opensilex.sparql.service.SPARQLService.update(SPARQLService.java:1524)
	at org.opensilex.core.organisation.dal.facility.FacilityDAO.updateMany(FacilityDAO.java:138)
	at org.opensilex.migration.one_point_five_ALL.FacilitiesLinkToVariablesAndDevicesMigration.execute(FacilitiesLinkToVariablesAndDevicesMigration.java:151)
	at org.opensilex.migration.one_point_five_ALL.MigrateToOnePointFive.execute(MigrateToOnePointFive.java:71)
	at org.opensilex.cli.SystemCommands.runUpdate(SystemCommands.java:99)
	at java.base/jdk.internal.reflect.NativeMethodAccessorImpl.invoke0(Native Method)
	at java.base/jdk.internal.reflect.NativeMethodAccessorImpl.invoke(Unknown Source)
	at java.base/jdk.internal.reflect.DelegatingMethodAccessorImpl.invoke(Unknown Source)
	at java.base/java.lang.reflect.Method.invoke(Unknown Source)
	at picocli.CommandLine.executeUserObject(CommandLine.java:2070)
	at picocli.CommandLine.access$1500(CommandLine.java:148)
	at picocli.CommandLine$RunLast.executeUserObjectOfLastSubcommandWithSameParent(CommandLine.java:2465)
	at picocli.CommandLine$RunLast.handle(CommandLine.java:2457)
	at picocli.CommandLine$RunLast.handle(CommandLine.java:2419)
	at picocli.CommandLine$AbstractParseResultHandler.execute(CommandLine.java:2277)
	at picocli.CommandLine$RunLast.execute(CommandLine.java:2421)
	at picocli.CommandLine.execute(CommandLine.java:2174)
	at org.opensilex.cli.MainCommand.main(MainCommand.java:96)
</details>

If you run into this error, it means that some of you have deleted some devices already linked to datas. You will have to remove old link to fix this.
- go to your Mongo database in the Data collection
- each data can have a provenance
- this provenance cans have one or many provWasAssociatedWith
- delete every provenance.provWasAssociatedWith matching the device URI in the error message.

Another fix could be to create devices with the same URI as in the stack trace list.