# SPARQL update 

This document describe the technical way OpenSILEX use SPARQL to update data.

**Document history (please add a line when you edit the document)**

| Date       | Editor(s)          | OpenSILEX version       | Comment           |
|------------|--------------------|-------------------------|-------------------|
| 18/09/2025 | yvan.roux@inrae.fr | 1.4.9 Explosive Emerald | Document creation |

## General solution

[SPARQLService](../../../../../../opensilex-sparql/src/main/java/org/opensilex/sparql/service/SPARQLService.java) is the main class we interact with. 
We interact with it through [SPARQLResourceModel](../../../../../../opensilex-sparql/src/main/java/org/opensilex/sparql/model/SPARQLResourceModel.java) which is the base class of all our models.

Lot of request are generated by [SPARQLClassQueryBuilder](../../../../../../opensilex-sparql/src/main/java/org/opensilex/sparql/mapping/SPARQLClassQueryBuilder.java).

In OpenSILEX, update is performed by deleting the old data and inserting the new data. When deleting and creating a SPARQLResourceModel, 
we are able to ignore some triples (some fields) in order to preserve values during update.

## Sparql properties

The update method handle such properties:
- @IgnoreUpdateIfNull
- @AutoUpdate

For technical explanation, see [sparql-property-annotation.md](sparql-property-annotation.md).

## Meta data specific case (and possible improvement)

SPARQLResourceModel contains meta data fields. Among them, `publisher` (dc:publisher) and `creationDate` (dc:issued) should NEVER be updated.
To ensure that, we are manually adding this two triples to the ignore list in `SPARQLService#deleteForUpdate`. Doing so,
`SPARQLClassQueryBuilder#getDeleteBuilder` will generate a DELETE query that delete all triples except these two.

For the creation part, the same is done in `SPARQLService#create` by adding `publisher` and `creationDate` fields to the ignore list passed to `SPARQLClassQueryBuilder#addCreateBuilder`. 
Doing so, for each SPARQLResourceModel we will add to the INSERT query every triple except these two.

### Improvements idea

A possible improvement would be to add a specific annotation like `@IgnoreUpdateAlways` that would be used for these two fields. 
This would allow to easily add other fields with the same behavior in the future.